MAUI (#95)
DevExpress-Examples/XAF_Security_E4908: EFCore/MAUI/Readme.md

This example demonstrates how to use our [Web API Service](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/concepts/security-system/security-system-overview) with a mobile .NET MAUI application using EF Core for data access. Our .NET MAUI application will use API endpoints for the Post business object to implement the following common scenarios:

- Authenticate and authorize users from different roles;
- List existing Post records;
- Create new Post records;
- Display a report based on Post records;
- Archive a Post record;
- Display a photo of a Post author.

## Prerequisites

- [Visual Studio 2022 v17.0+](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/)
- [.NET SDK 6.0+](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-core)

> - [Download and run our Unified Component Installer](https://www.devexpress.com/Products/Try/) or add [NuGet feed URL](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116042/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/obtain-your-nuget-feed-url) to Visual Studio NuGet feeds.

Reviewer: All other items in this list indicate version numbers. Is it not important which version of DevExpress I have installed? 

If I simply "add NuGet feed URL", then I haven't really installed anything yet, right? How would I proceed to the next step and use the Wizard? And the linked article only explains how to obtain my key... It doesn't tell me how to add the URL to the Package Manager. 

Finally, according to the article below, NuGet package don't even give you an option to run the Solution Wizard: 

https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403401/backend-web-api-service/create-new-application-with-web-api-service

So I assume we shouldn't even list it as an option?

Reviewer 2: I rewrote the Prerequisites section to make it clear why would someone consider the NuGet feed as an option (this allows you you run the example or use it as a boilerplate without having the Wizard installed). I also linked the article that explains how to register the feed URL.

>   *We recommend that you select all products when you run the DevExpress installer. It will register local NuGet package sources and item / project templates required for these tutorials. You can uninstall unnecessary components later.*

Reviewer: This is vague. Which components are "unnecessary"? How do I choose what to uninstall? And if I know what to uninstall, why install them in the first place? 

For example, why would I need to install WPF?

Reviewer 2: I rewrote this part as follows: "Make sure to enable the Cross-Platform .NET App UI & Web API service (XAF) option in the list of products to install."

> **NOTE** 
>

> > If you have a pre-release version of our components, for example, provided with the hotfix, you also have a pre-release version of NuGet packages. These packages will not be restored automatically and you need to update them manually as described in the [Updating Packages](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/118420/Installation/Install-DevExpress-Controls-Using-NuGet-Packages/Updating-Packages) article using the [Include prerelease](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/create-packages/prerelease-packages#installing-and-updating-pre-release-packages) option.

Reviewer: I don't know if this even applies. See my note below about NuGet packages. NuGet installation may not even be a valid option for this tutorial (that uses wizards).

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this note is necessary, but it does apply if a user chooses to only use the NuGet feed to install the packages but also wants the pre-release versions.

Watch video: [Preview Reports as PDF in .NET MAUI Apps using Backend Web API Service Endpoints with EF Core](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bn4iF5Gc9XY)

## Step 7. Use the Swagger UI to test the Web API project custom and build-in endpoints. 

> **NOTE** 
>
>Using the Swagger interface and with the debugger attached, you must authenticate at least once to scaffold the database and initialize the data.

  ![](../../images/MAUI/Swagger.png) 

See the [Test the Web API with Swagger or Postman](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404281/backend-web-api-service/test-the-web-api-with-swagger-postman)  documentation article for more information.

## Step 8. Create the .NET MAUI project.

> **NOTE** 
>
> Debugging configurations for both iOS and Android can be complex, so it is not feasible to provide all possible scenarios. In this demo, we tested using Windows 10 with Visual Studio 2022. For iOS, we utilized the paired remote Mac method, and for Android, we utilized the built-in emulator..

> > The .NET MAUI project does not have any dependencies to the XAF assemblies. However, for convenience, we will use the DevExpress .NET MAUI components and Wizard to scaffold the initial project.

Reviewer: Somehow this doesn't make sense to me. Why would MAUI Wizard be in any way related to XAF?

Reviewer 2: I cannot think of a reason why we need this note. I just removed it.

> 1. Use the New Project Wizard. 

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, this step requires the developer to obtain an extension for Visual Studio. 

In other words, either we need to extend the Prerequisites in the very beginning, or this section should have it's own Prerequisites. What version of DevExpress MAUI should I get and from where? Where do I get the VS Extension with the Project Template?

Reviewer 2: I updated the Prerequisites section, so it also mentions the .NET MAUI controls installer.

> This example demonstrates how to use our [Web API service](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/concepts/security-system/security-system-overview) with a mobile .NET MAUI application using EF Core for data access. Our .NET MAUI application will use API endpoints for the Post business object to implement the following common scenarios:

Reviewer: The verb "use" appears three times in a couple of sentences: "use our Web API Serivce ... using EF Core.... will use API endpoints". 

```suggestion
This example demonstrates how you can create a [Web API service](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/concepts/security-system/security-system-overview) backend and a mobile .NET MAUI application frontend. The frontend app uses EF Core for data access.

The application works with blog post data. It authenticates a user, determines his or her permissions. and selectively enables the following data operations: 
```

> - Authenticate and authorize users from different roles

Reviewer: Since I already mentioned authentication in the previous paragraph, let remove this line. 

```suggestion

```

- List existing Post records
- Display a photo of a Post author
- Create new Post records
- Archive a Post record
- Display a report based on Post records

## Prerequisites

- [Visual Studio 2022 v17.0+](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/)
- [.NET SDK 6.0+](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-core)

> - [Download and install DevExpress .NET MAUI Project Templates for Visual Studio 2022](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DevExpress.MauiVSTemplates2022)

Reviewer: There's no reason to say "Download and install" in the Prerequisites section. That's a given that they need to download and install. We don't say it in the first two items, so why do it now? 

```suggestion
- [DevExpress .NET MAUI Project Templates for Visual Studio 2022](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DevExpress.MauiVSTemplates2022)
```

> - [Download and run our Unified Component Installer](https://www.devexpress.com/Products/Try/). Make sure to enable the **Cross-Platform .NET App UI & Web API service (XAF)** option in the list of products to install. It will register local NuGet package sources and item / project templates required to follow through this tutorial. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DevExpress Libraries v22.2+](https://www.devexpress.com/Products/Try/). Download and run our **Unified Component Installer**. Make sure to enable the **Cross-Platform .NET App UI & Web API service (XAF)** option in the list of products to install. The installer will register local NuGet package sources and Visual Studio templates required for this tutorial. 
```

>   Alternatively, if you only want to run the example project or use the project as a boilerplate for your application, you can manually register your [NuGet feed URL](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116042/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/obtain-your-nuget-feed-url) in Visual Studio as described in the following article: [Setup Visual Studio's NuGet Package Manager](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116698/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/setup-visual-studios-nuget-package-manager)

Reviewer: You say "alternatively", which I understand as an alternative for the entire list. But is seems to be an alternative for the last item only. So I need to make that clear. 

```suggestion
You don't have to use the **DevExpress Unified Component Installer**, if you only want to run the example project or use the project as a boilerplate for your application. You can manually register your [NuGet feed URL](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116042/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/obtain-your-nuget-feed-url) in Visual Studio as described in the following article: [Setup Visual Studio's NuGet Package Manager](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116698/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/setup-visual-studios-nuget-package-manager).
```

  
  > **NOTE** 
  >

>   > If you have a pre-release version of our components, for example, provided with the hotfix, you also have a pre-release version of NuGet packages. These packages will not be restored automatically and you need to update them manually as described in the [Updating Packages](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/118420/Installation/Install-DevExpress-Controls-Using-NuGet-Packages/Updating-Packages) article using the [Include prerelease](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/create-packages/prerelease-packages#installing-and-updating-pre-release-packages) option.

Reviewer: Long sentence, weak verb "have"... I decided to update a bit:

```suggestion
  > You may use a pre-release version of our components. For example, you may have obtained a hotfix from DevExpress. In such cases, NuGet packages will not be restored automatically and you need to update them manually as described in the [Updating Packages](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/118420/Installation/Install-DevExpress-Controls-Using-NuGet-Packages/Updating-Packages) article. Enable the [Include prerelease](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/create-packages/prerelease-packages#installing-and-updating-pre-release-packages) option.
```

- [Declare a data model](#declare-a-data-model)
- [Set up a development database connection](#set-up-a-development-database-connection)
- [Generate initial data](#generate-initial-data)
- [Use Swagger UI to test the Web API service](#use-swagger-ui-to-test-the-web-api-service)

[**Build and test a basic .NET MAUI App (Frontend)**](#build-and-test-a-basic-net-maui-app-frontend)

- [Create a .NET MAUI project](#create-a-net-maui-project)
- [Modify platform specific settings](#modify-the-platform-specific-settings)
- [Define the application's data model](#define-the-applications-data-model)
- [Implement and test first views: "Login" and "Item List"](#implement-and-test-first-views-login-and-item-list)

[**Extend backend and frontend apps**](#extend-backend-and-frontend-apps)

- [Add an "Item Details" View](#add-an-item-details-view)
- [Add a "New Item" entry form](#add-a-new-item-entry-form)
- [Allow users to archive records](#allow-users-to-archive-records)
- [Add reporting functionality](#add-reporting-functionality)

## Build and Test a Basic Web API Service App (Backend)

### Create a Web API project using the XAF Solution Wizard

> 1. Start the wizard and select a Web API only project.

Reviewer: We need to start from the beginning. I expect some people may be confused about how to get to XAF Solution Wizard. 

```suggestion
1. In Visual Studio, create a new project. Use the DevExpress XAF Template Gallery template. Enter project information and start the Wizard. On the first page, select only one tile: **Service (ASP.NET Core Web API)**.
```

>   ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardWebAPI.png)

Reviewer: It would be great to add borders to Wizard screenshots. Sometimes it looks like the top part of the screenshot belong to the text above and then there's another separate screenshot that's related to text below. There's so much white space in the middle.

Reviewer 2: I edited the images to make them easier on the eyes.

2. Choose Entity Framework as your ORM.
  ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardEFCore.png)

> 3. Choose Standard Authentication to generate the [JWT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token)  authentication scaffolding code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Choose **Standard Authentication** to generate the [JWT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token)  authentication scaffolding code.
```

   ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardAuthStd.png)

> 4. If you are using the [Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml), the next page will allow you to select additional modules to add to your Web API service. Choose all available modules and click **Finish**.

Reviewer: Not sure why we instruct people to add all available modules. From what I see, the Reports module is required for this tutorial. Others are optional (we may tell people that they may use them if they plan to extend their project.)

```suggestion
4. If you own a license to the DevExpress [Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml), the next page allows you to select additional modules to add to your Web API Service. Make sure to select **Reports** as this module is required to complete the tutorial (last step). You can choose other modules if you plan to extend the application. Click **Finish**.
```

  ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardAllWebAPIModules.png)

> 5. Modify the `WebAPI/Properties/launchSettings.json` file and remove the IIS Express profile to ensure that the `Kestrel server ports` will be utilized.

Reviewer: So people need to REMOVE the code below? Maybe emphasize it within the code sample too? Otherwise, I would just compare my code to the sample below and if they match I'll continue.

Reviewer 2: I added a sentence: "After that, the file's `"profiles"` section should look as shown below:" and replaced the code sample of what to remove with a code sample of how it should look after the removal.

   _Properties/launchSettings.json_:
   ```json
   "IIS Express": {
      "commandName": "IISExpress",
      "launchBrowser": true,
      "launchUrl": "swagger",
      "environmentVariables": {
        "ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT": "Development"
      }
   },
   ```

> See the [Create a Standalone Web API Application](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403401/backend-web-api-service/create-new-application-with-web-api-service) for more information.

Reviewer: It's always best to put the link at the end. 

```suggestion
See the following article for additional information: [Create a Standalone Web API Application](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403401/backend-web-api-service/create-new-application-with-web-api-service).
```

### Declare a data model

1. Declare the `Post` object.

>    _BusinessObjects/launchSettings.json_

Reviewer: I don't think that a business object can be declared in a JSON file... Probably a reference copy-pasted from somewhere else.

Reviewer 2: You are correct. Changed to "...Post.cs"

   ```cs
   [VisibleInReports]
   public class Post : BaseObject {
      public virtual string Title { get; set; }
      public virtual string Content { get; set; }
      public virtual ApplicationUser Author { get; set; }
      public override void OnCreated() {
         base.OnCreated();
         Author = ObjectSpace.FindObject<ApplicationUser>(CriteriaOperator.Parse("ID=CurrentUserId()"));
      }
   }
   ```

>    In the above code sample, the `Post` class inherits [BaseObject](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/DevExpress.Persistent.BaseImpl.BaseObject) to simplify data model implementation. In particular, this tutorial makes use of the following `BaseObject` class's features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the above code sample, the `Post` class inherits [BaseObject](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/DevExpress.Persistent.BaseImpl.BaseObject) to simplify data model implementation. This tutorial makes use of the following `BaseObject` features:
```

>    - The predefined `Guid`-type primary key field (`ID`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The predefined `Guid`-type primary key field (`ID`)
```

>    - The `OnCreated` lifecycle method,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The `OnCreated` lifecycle method
```

>    - The `ObjectSpace` property, which allows you to communicate with the underlying data layer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The `ObjectSpace` property that allows you to communicate with the underlying data layer 
```

         viewerRole.Name = "ViewerRole";
         viewerRole.AddTypePermission<Post>(SecurityOperations.Read,  SecurityPermissionState.Allow);
         viewerRole.AddTypePermission<ApplicationUser>(SecurityOperations.Read,  SecurityPermissionState.Allow);
         viewerUser.Roles.Add(viewerRole);
         viewerUser.Roles.Add(defaultRole);
 
         //commit
         ObjectSpace.CommitChanges();
 
         //assign authentication type
         foreach (var user in new[] { editorUser, viewerUser }. Cast<ISecurityUserWithLoginInfo>()) {
             user.CreateUserLoginInfo(SecurityDefaults.PasswordAuthentication,
                 ObjectSpace.GetKeyValueAsString(user));
         }
 
         //sample posts
         var post = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<Post>();
         post.Title = "Hello World";
         post.Content = "This is a FREE API for everybody";
         post.Author=editorUser;
         post = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<Post>();
         post.Title = "Hello MAUI";
         post.Content = "Please smash the like button to help our videos get  discovered";
         post.Author=editorUser;
     }
   ```

### Use Swagger UI to test the Web API service

> At this point, you can already run your Web API service and use the Swagger interface to authenticate as one of the previously defined users and test the generated endpoints (for example, query the available posts). See the [Test the Web API with Swagger or Postman](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404281/backend-web-api-service/test-the-web-api-with-swagger-postman) documentation article for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you can already run your Web API service and use the Swagger interface to authenticate as one of the previously defined users and test the generated endpoints (for example, query the available posts). See the following article for additional information: [Test the Web API with Swagger or Postman](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404281/backend-web-api-service/test-the-web-api-with-swagger-postman).
```

                 ObjectSpace.GetKeyValueAsString(user));
         }
 
         //sample posts
         var post = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<Post>();
         post.Title = "Hello World";
         post.Content = "This is a FREE API for everybody";
         post.Author=editorUser;
         post = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<Post>();
         post.Title = "Hello MAUI";
         post.Content = "Please smash the like button to help our videos get  discovered";
         post.Author=editorUser;
     }
   ```

### Use Swagger UI to test the Web API service

At this point, you can already run your Web API service and use the Swagger interface to authenticate as one of the previously defined users and test the generated endpoints (for example, query the available posts). See the following article for additional information: [Test the Web API with Swagger or Postman](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404281/backend-web-api-service/test-the-web-api-with-swagger-postman).

![](../../images/MAUI/SwaggerQueryPosts.png)

![](../../images/MAUI/SwaggerPostsResponse.png)

## Build and test a basic .NET MAUI app (Frontend)

### Create a .NET MAUI project

> **NOTE** 
>

> > Debugging configurations for both iOS and Android can be complex, so it is not feasible to provide all possible scenarios. In this demo, we tested using Windows 10 with Visual Studio 2022. For iOS, we utilized the paired remote Mac method, and for Android, we utilized the built-in emulator..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Debugging configurations for both iOS and Android can be complex, so it is not feasible to provide all possible scenarios. We tested the app on Windows 10 with Visual Studio 2022. For iOS tests, we paired a remote Mac. For Android tests, we utilized the built-in emulator.
```

> 1. Open the the _Create a new project_ window in Visual Studio and select the the DevExpress .NET MAUI template Wizard. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the the _Create a new project_ window in Visual Studio. Select the DevExpress .NET MAUI option and start the wizard. 
```

  ![](../../images/MAUI/MAUINewProjectWizard.png)

> 2. Choose both the _IOS & Android_ platform, the _Tabbed_ layout and the _Collection View_, the _Data Editors_ and the _Data Forms_ options.

Reviewer: You always want to keep longer lists at the end of the sentence, not in the middle. 

```suggestion
2. Choose both the _iOS & Android_ platforms, the _Tabbed_ layout, and the following controls: _Collection View_, _Data Editors_, and _Data Forms_.
```

  ![](../../images/MAUI/MAUINewProjectWizardConfig.png)

> ### Modify the platform specific settings

Reviewer: Plural rarely requires an article: only if the reader definitely knows what settings you're talking about. 

```suggestion
### Modify platform specific settings
```

> 1. Modify the `Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml` to request permissions for network access, file storage and document access.

Reviewer: Not sure what you mean by "file storage" and how that differs from "document access". 

I guess what I would really want to see is how this all related to our task. Why do I need the the following permissions: "WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE" or "READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE"? What would I read from and write to external storage? What documents would I manage with the help of the "MANAGE_DOCUMENTS" permission? 

Does it relate to our tasks of "Archive a record" or "Add Reporting functionality"?

Reviewer 2: Most of the the code in the manifest is really unrelated to this particular application's requirements (only the FileProvider settings are needed). I rewrote the sentence as follows: "In the `Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml` file, set up the file provider, which is required for the application to store downloaded reports:"
I also removed irrelevant code from the code sample/

   _Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml_:
   ```xml
     <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
     <manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android">
         <uses-sdk android:minSdkVersion="21" android:targetSdkVersion="33" />
         <application android:allowBackup="true" android:icon="@mipmap/appicon"  android:roundIcon="@mipmap/appicon_round" android:supportsRtl="true">
         <provider
         android:name="androidx.core.content.FileProvider"
         android:authorities="${applicationId}.provider"
         android:exported="false"
         android:grantUriPermissions="true">
         <meta-data
             android:name="android.support.FILE_PROVIDER_PATHS"
             android:resource="@xml/provider_paths" />
         </provider>
     </application>
         <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.ACCESS_NETWORK_STATE" />
     <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.WRITE_EXTERNAL_STORAGE" />
     <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.READ_EXTERNAL_STORAGE" />
     <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.MANAGE_DOCUMENTS" />
     </manifest>
   ```

> 3. Add an `AndroidMessageHandler` class definition to `Platform/Android/AndroidMessageHandler.cs`.

Reviewer: Again, the question is "why am I doing this"? The article shouldn't just give me code snippets. Let me know what this class will be used for. 

Something like this might work (if it's true):

```suggestion
3. Add an `AndroidMessageHandler` class definition to `Platform/Android/AndroidMessageHandler.cs`. You will use this class to create an HTTP Client object that exchanges messages with the backend. 
```

   namespace MAUI.Platforms.Android {
      class AndroidMessageHandler : Xamarin.Android.Net.AndroidMessageHandler {
            public AndroidMessageHandler() 
               => ServerCertificateCustomValidationCallback = (_, cert, _, errors) 
                  => cert is { Issuer: "CN=localhost" } || errors == System.Net. Security.SslPolicyErrors.None;

            protected override Javax.Net.Ssl.IHostnameVerifier GetSSLHostnameVerifier (Javax.Net.Ssl.HttpsURLConnection connection)
               => new HostnameVerifier();

            private sealed class HostnameVerifier : Java.Lang.Object, Javax.Net.Ssl. IHostnameVerifier {
               public bool Verify(string hostname, Javax.Net.Ssl.ISSLSession  session) 
                  => Javax.Net.Ssl.HttpsURLConnection.DefaultHostnameVerifier!. Verify(hostname, session) ||
                  hostname == "10.0.2.2" && session.PeerPrincipal?.Name ==  "CN=localhost";
            }
      }
   }

   namespace MAUI.Services {
      public static partial class HttpMessageHandler {
            static HttpMessageHandler() 
               => PlatformHttpMessageHandler = new AndroidMessageHandler();
      }
   } 
   ```

> 4. Create an `IOSMessageHandler` class in the `Platform/IOS` folder.

Reviewer: Again, you need a bit of a comment. But since we already said something in the previous step, this one can be shorter: 

```suggestion
4. You need the same functionality for iOS applications too. Create an `IOSMessageHandler` class in the `Platform/IOS` folder.
```

         var tokenResponse = await RequestTokenAsync(userName, password);
         var reposeContent = await tokenResponse.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
         if (tokenResponse.IsSuccessStatusCode) {
               HttpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Authorization = new AuthenticationHeaderValue("Bearer", reposeContent);
               return string.Empty;
         }
         return reposeContent;
      }

      private async Task<HttpResponseMessage> RequestTokenAsync(string userName, string password) {
         try {
               return await HttpClient.PostAsync($"{_apiUrl}Authentication/Authenticate",
                     new StringContent(JsonSerializer.Serialize(new { userName, password = $"{password}" }), Encoding.UTF8, ApplicationJson));
         }
         catch (Exception) {
               return new HttpResponseMessage(System.Net.HttpStatusCode.BadGateway) { Content = new StringContent("An error occurred during the processing of the request. Please consult the demo's ReadMe file (Step 1,10) to discover potential causes and find solutions.") };
         }
      }

   }
   ```

   > **NOTE** 
   >

>    > If you are developing on a Windows PC and using a remote Mac to do the  build and run the simulator, localhost will not resolve to the machine where you have your Web API service hosted. Solutions to this case can be found online e.g. [Accessing ASP. NET Core API hosted on Kestrel over Https from iOS Simulator](https://nicksnettravels.builttoroam.com/post-2019-04-28-accessing-aspnet-core-api-hosted-on-kestrel-from-ios-simulator-android-emulator-and-uwp-applications-aspx/). Similarly, [you cannot access the Web API server when debugging the application using a real device (Android) connected through USB]( https://github.com/dotnet/maui/issues/8379). 

Reviewer: Just separating thoughts into individual sentences/paragraphs:

```suggestion
   > If you are developing on a Windows PC and using a remote Mac to do the build and run the simulator, localhost will not resolve to the machine where you host your Web API service. Multiple solution guides are available online. For example, you may find the following article helpful: [Accessing ASP. NET Core API hosted on Kestrel over Https from iOS Simulator](https://nicksnettravels.builttoroam.com/post-2019-04-28-accessing-aspnet-core-api-hosted-on-kestrel-from-ios-simulator-android-emulator-and-uwp-applications-aspx/). 
   >   
   > You may experience a similar problem with your Android project. Review the following GitHub issue: [Cannot access the Web API server when debugging the application using a real device (Android) connected through USB]( https://github.com/dotnet/maui/issues/8379). 
```

### Implement and test first views: "Login" and "Item List"

> 1. Register the `WebAPIService` as well as routes and initial navigation in `App.xaml.cs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Register the `WebAPIService`, routes, and initial navigation in `App.xaml.cs`.
```

      IsAuthInProcess = false;
      if (!string.IsNullOrEmpty(response)) {
          ErrorText = response;
          HasError = true;
          return;
      }
      HasError = false;
      await Navigation.NavigateToAsync<ItemsViewModel>();
   }

   ```

3. In the `ItemsViewModel`, modify the `ExecuteLoadItemsCommand` to request all posts from the `IDataStore` service.

   _ViewModels/ItemsViewModel.cs_:
   ```cs
   async Task ExecuteLoadItemsCommand() {
      IsBusy = true;
      try
      {
         Items.Clear();
         var items = await DataStore.GetItemsAsync(true);
         foreach (var item in items) {
            Items.Add(item);
         }
      }
      catch (Exception ex) {
         System.Diagnostics.Debug.WriteLine(ex);
      }
      finally {
         IsBusy = false;
      }
   }  
   ```

Start the Web API project, and then the .NET MAUI app. Log in as an Editor or Viewer user created in the Web API Module Updater.

![](../../images/MAUI/LogIn.png)

After you log in, you will see the predefined posts displayed in a list view.

![](../../images/MAUI/CollectionView.png)

## Extend Backend and Frontend Apps

### Add an "Item Details" view

> 1. Implement a Web API service endpoint that serves the author's photo for a post based on the post's ID. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Implement a Web API service endpoint that serves the author's photo based on the post's ID. 
```

   First, add the `Photo` property to the `ApplicationUser` persistent class:

   _BusinessObjects/ApplicationUser.cs_:
   ```cs
   public class ApplicationUser : PermissionPolicyUser, ISecurityUserWithLoginInfo {
      // ...
      public virtual MediaDataObject Photo { get; set; }
   }
   ```

>    Add a logic that assigns photos to predefined users to the Module Updater:

Reviewer: You say "add logic .. to the Module Updater", and there's a lot of stuff in between, which makes it a bit hard to read. (The fact that you repeat the preposition "to" contributes to the confusion.) I'm changing the flow a bit, so that related things go together. 

"Logic" is a mass noun and doesn't require an article.

```suggestion
   Modify the Module Updater. Add logic that assigns photos to predefined users:
```

   _DatabaseUpdate\Updater.cs_:
   ```cs
   // ...
   editorUser.Photo = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<MediaDataObject>();
   editorUser.Photo.MediaData = GetResourceByName("Janete");
   viewerUser.Photo = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<MediaDataObject>();
   viewerUser.Photo.MediaData = GetResourceByName("John");
   // ...
   ```

   > **NOTE**
   >

>    > In the example code, the `GetResourceByName` method returns a byte array representation of an account image based on its name. You can find an example implementation of this method in the WebAPI project's [_DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs_](./WebApi/DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs) file. Note that this implementation requires the image resources to be compiled into the application's assembly (the .jpg files' `Build Action` option must be set to `Embedded resource`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > In the example code, the `GetResourceByName` method returns a byte array representation of an account image based on its name. You can find an example implementation of this method in the Web API project's [_DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs_](./WebApi/DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs) file. Note that this implementation requires the image resources to be compiled into the application's assembly (the .jpg files' `Build Action` option must be set to `Embedded resource`).
```

                OnItemSelected(value);
            }
        }

        async void OnItemSelected(Post post) {
            if (post != null) await Navigation.NavigateToAsync<ItemDetailViewModel>(post.ID);
        }
        // ...
    }
   ```

   _App.xaml.cs_:

   ```cs
   public App() {
      // ...
      Routing.RegisterRoute(typeof(ItemDetailPage).FullName, typeof(ItemDetailPage));
      // ...
   }
   ```
   
   _Views/ItemDetailPage.xaml_:

   ```xml
   <StackLayout Spacing="5" Padding="15">
      <Label Text="Title:" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="12" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalLightText}"/>
      <Label Text="{Binding Title}" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="14" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalText}" Margin="0, 0, 0, 15"/>
      <Label Text="Content:" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="12" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalLightText}" />
      <Label Text="{Binding Content}" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="14" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalText}"/>
      <Label Text="Author:"></Label>
      <Image   Source="{Binding Thumbnail}"></Image>
   </StackLayout>
   ```

![](../../images/MAUI/DetailView.png)

### Add a "New Item" entry form

> 1. The Web API Service automatically generates OData endpoints required to create business objects. However, because the example application's security system is configured to disallow post creation for some users, it is beneficial to have a way to check a user's permissions before they can try to submit a post. To do this, implement a custom `CanCreate` endpoint.

Reviewer: Two main reasons why I started an edit: 

- long sentence
- the phrase "it is beneficial to have" (weak verbs)

```suggestion
1. The Web API Service automatically generates OData endpoints required to create business objects. However, the example application's security system is configured to disallow post creation for some users. You want to check permissions before a user can try and submit a post. For this purpose, implement a custom `CanCreate` endpoint.
```

   _API/CustomEndPointController.cs_:
   ```cs
   [HttpGet(nameof(CanCreate))]
   public IActionResult CanCreate(string typeName) {
       var strategy = (SecurityStrategy)_securityProvider.GetSecurity();
       var objectType = strategy.TypesInfo.PersistentTypes.First(info => info.Name  == typeName).Type;
       return Ok(strategy.CanCreate(objectType));
   }
   ```

> 2. Add a method that checks the permissions and a method that submits a new post to the .NET MAUI application's data service.

Reviewer: Are we adding methods to the .NET Maui App service? Or are we submitting a post to the .NET Maui App service? 

I assume you mean add "methods to the service". Then again, I want to re-arrange thoughts so that related things go together. 

```suggestion
2. Add new methods to the .NET MAUI application's data service: one will check user permissions, another will  submit a new post.
```

           }
           return httpResponseMessage.IsSuccessStatusCode;
       }
   }
   ```

3. Configure the views and navigation:

   _ViewModels/ItemsViewModel.cs_:

   ```cs
   public class ItemsViewModel : BaseViewModel {
      public ItemsViewModel() {
         // ...
         AddItemCommand = new Command(OnAddItem);
      }
      public Command AddItemCommand { get; }

      async void OnAddItem(object obj) {
         if (await DataStore.UserCanCreatePostAsync()) {
               await Navigation.NavigateToAsync<NewItemViewModel>(null);
         }
         else {
               await Shell.Current.DisplayAlert("Error", "Access denied", "Ok");
         }
      }
   }
   ```

   _App.xaml.cs_:

   ```cs
   public App() {
      // ...
      Routing.RegisterRoute(typeof(NewItemPage).FullName, typeof(NewItemPage));
      // ...
   }
   ```

   _Views/ItemsPage.xaml_:

   ```xml
   <ContentPage.ToolbarItems >
       <ToolbarItem Text="Add" Command="{Binding AddItemCommand}" />
   </ContentPage.ToolbarItems>
   ```

![](../../images/MAUI/Edit.png)
   
### Allow users to archive records

> 1. In the Web API service, create the `Archive` endpoint, which gets posts from the database, and archives them to the disk. The controller action's implementation bellow uses the `securedObjectSpaceFactory` to communicate with the data store so that all operation on the data respect the security permissions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Web API service, create an `Archive` endpoint. This endpoint will obtain a post from the database and archive that post to the disk. The controller action's implementation below uses the `securedObjectSpaceFactory` to communicate with the data store so that all data operations respect security permissions. 
```

   _API/CustomEndPointController.cs_:
   ```cs
   [HttpPost(nameof(Archive))]
   public async Task<IActionResult> Archive([FromBody] Post post) {
       using var objectSpace = _securedObjectSpaceFactory.CreateObjectSpace<Post>();
       post = objectSpace.GetObject(post);
       var photo = post.Author.Photo.MediaResource.MediaData;
       await System.IO.File.WriteAllTextAsync($"{post.ID}",
           JsonSerializer.Serialize(new { photo, post.Title, post.Content, post.Author.UserName }));
       return Ok();
   }
   ```

> 2. Add a method used to archive a post to the .NET MAUI application's data service.

Reviewer: Once again, this edit aims to put related things together. 

```suggestion
2. Extend the .NET MAUI application's data service with a method that archives a post.
```

   _Services/IDataStore.cs_:

   ```cs
   public interface IDataStore<T> {
       // ...
       Task ArchivePostAsync(T post);
   }
   ```

   _Services/WebAPIService.cs_:
   
   ```cs
   public class WebAPIService : IDataStore<Post> {
      // ...
       public async Task ArchivePostAsync(Post post) {
           var httpResponseMessage = await HttpClient.PostAsync($"{_apiUrl}CustomEndPoint/Archive", new StringContent(JsonSerializer.Serialize(post), Encoding.UTF8, ApplicationJson));
           if (httpResponseMessage.IsSuccessStatusCode) {
               await Shell.Current.DisplayAlert("Success", "This post is saved to disk", "Ok");
           }
           else {
               await Shell.Current.DisplayAlert("Error", await httpResponseMessage.Content.ReadAsStringAsync(), "Ok");
           }
       }
   }
   ```

> 3. Configure the detail view.

Reviewer: We better describe what exactly we need to configure. 

```suggestion
3. Configure the detail view: add a UI element that initiates the Archive command. 
```

        private async void OnArchive(object obj) {
            if (!await DataStore.UserCanCreatePostAsync()) {
                await Shell.Current.DisplayAlert("Error", "Permission denied", "OK");
            }
            else {
                await DataStore.ArchivePostAsync(Post);
            }
        }

        public Command ArchiveCommand { get; }
    }
   ```

   _Views/ItemDetailPage.xaml_
   ```xml
   <ContentPage.ToolbarItems >
       <ToolbarItem Text="Archive" Command="{Binding ArchiveCommand}"></ToolbarItem>
   </ContentPage.ToolbarItems>
   ```

![](../../images/MAUI/Archive.png)

### Add reporting functionality

The [XAF Reports module](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113591/shape-export-print-data/reports/reports-v2-module-overview?p=netframework) is a [Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml) feature that you can use to easily integrate [DevExpress Reports](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/reporting/) into your backend Web API service. Skip this step if you are using the Web API service as a part of the _DevExpress .NET App Security Library_ & Web API service free offer.

> Follow the steps bellow to create and initialize a report:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to create and initialize a report:
```

> 1. Add the Report component using the Visual Studio New Item wizard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a DevExpress Report component using the Visual Studio's New Item wizard.
```

> 2. Drag and drop a CollectionDataSource component from the Visual Studio toolbox and change its ObjectTypeName to `WebAPI.BusinessObjects.Post`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Drag and drop a `CollectionDataSource` component from the Visual Studio toolbox and change its `ObjectTypeName` to `WebAPI.BusinessObjects.Post`.
```

3. Drag & drop all discovered fields from the Field List window onto the Report details surface.

   ![](../../images/MAUI/ReportDesigner.png) 

> 4. Use a predefined reports updater to initialize the report (Module.cs).

Reviewer: Why don't you indicate the file in the same way that you did in other examples: separate line before the code snippet?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Use a predefined reports updater to initialize the report.

_Module.cs_:
```

   ```cs
   public override IEnumerable<ModuleUpdater> GetModuleUpdaters(IObjectSpace objectSpace, Version versionFromDB) {
        var predefinedReportsUpdater = new PredefinedReportsUpdater(Application, objectSpace, versionFromDB);
        predefinedReportsUpdater.AddPredefinedReport<XtraReport1>("Post Report",typeof(Post));
        return new ModuleUpdater[] { new DatabaseUpdate.Updater(objectSpace, versionFromDB),predefinedReportsUpdater };
    }
   ```
See the [Create a Report in Visual Studio](https://docs.devexpress.com/XtraReports/14989/get-started-with-devexpress-reporting/create-a-report-in-visual-studio#add-a-new-report) documentation topic for more information on creating and editing reports.

> For more information on using predefined static report in XAF, see the [Create Predefined Static Reports](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113645/shape-export-print-data/reports/create-predefined-static-reports) article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on using predefined static reports in XAF, see the following article: [Create Predefined Static Reports](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113645/shape-export-print-data/reports/create-predefined-static-reports).
```

> Watch video: [Preview Reports as PDF in .NET MAUI Apps using Backend Web API service Endpoints with EF Core](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bn4iF5Gc9XY)

> 5. Create the `GetReport` endpoint which will redirect to build-in `DownloadByName` endpoint and will return a Report for the Post with title _Post Report_.

Reviewer: The phrase "for the Post" implies that the report will only contain information about a single Post. I don't think that's correct. 

```suggestion
5. Create a `GetReport` endpoint. It redirects to the built-in `DownloadByName` endpoint and returns a Report with title _Post Report_.
```

   _API/CustomEndPointController.cs_:
   ```cs
   [HttpGet(nameof(GetReport))]
   public RedirectResult GetReport() 
       => Redirect("~/api/report/DownloadByName(Post Report)");
   ```

> 6. In the MAUI application's data service, implement a method that downloads that downloads an exported report:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. In the MAUI application's data service, implement a method that downloads the report:
```

       await File.WriteAllBytesAsync(fileName, bytes);
       var intent = new Android.Content.Intent(Android.Content.Intent.ActionView);
       intent.SetDataAndType(AndroidX.Core.Content.FileProvider.GetUriForFile(Android.App. Application.Context,
           $"{Android.App.Application.Context.ApplicationContext?.PackageName}.provider", new Java.IO.File(fileName)),"application/pdf");
       intent.SetFlags(Android.Content.ActivityFlags.ClearWhenTaskReset | Android.Content.ActivityFlags.NewTask | Android.Content.ActivityFlags.GrantReadUriPermission);
       Android.App.Application.Context.ApplicationContext?.StartActivity(intent);
   #else
       var path = Environment.GetFolderPath (Environment.SpecialFolder.Personal);
       var fileName = $"{path}/Report.pdf";
       await File.WriteAllBytesAsync(fileName, bytes);
       var filePath = Path.Combine(path, "Report.pdf");
       var viewer = UIKit.UIDocumentInteractionController.FromUrl(Foundation.NSUrl.FromFilename(filePath));
       viewer.PresentOpenInMenu(new System.Drawing.RectangleF(0,-260,320,320),Platform.   GetCurrentUIViewController()!.View! , true);
   #endif
   }
   ```

> 7. Update the items view do display and process the command to display the report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Update the List view: add a command that displays the report.
```

> # How to Create a Web API Service Backend for a .NET MAUШ Application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# How to Create a Web API Service Backend for a .NET MAUI Application
```

This example demonstrates how you can create a [Web API service](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/concepts/security-system/security-system-overview) backend and a mobile .NET MAUI application frontend. The frontend app uses EF Core for data access.

> The application works with blog post data. It authenticates a user, determines his or her permissions. and selectively enables the following data operations: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The application works with blog post data. It authenticates a user, determines his or her permissions, and selectively enables the following data operations: 
```

- List existing Post records
- Display a photo of a Post author
- Create new Post records
- Archive a Post record
- Display a report based on Post records

## Prerequisites

- [Visual Studio 2022 v17.0+](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/)
- [.NET SDK 6.0+](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-core)
- [DevExpress .NET MAUI Project Templates for Visual Studio 2022](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DevExpress.MauiVSTemplates2022)
- [DevExpress Libraries v22.2+](https://www.devexpress.com/Products/Try/). Download and run our **Unified Component Installer**. Make sure to enable the **Cross-Platform .NET App UI & Web API service (XAF)** option in the list of products to install. The installer will register local NuGet package sources and Visual Studio templates required for this tutorial. 

> You don't have to use the **DevExpress Unified Component Installer**, if you only want to run the example project or use the project as a boilerplate for your application. You can manually register your [NuGet feed URL](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116042/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/obtain-your-nuget-feed-url) in Visual Studio as described in the following article: [Setup Visual Studio's NuGet Package Manager](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116698/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/setup-visual-studios-nuget-package-manager).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You don't have to use the **DevExpress Unified Component Installer** if you only want to run the example project or use the project as a boilerplate for your application. You can manually register your [NuGet feed URL](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116042/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/obtain-your-nuget-feed-url) in Visual Studio as described in the following article: [Setup Visual Studio's NuGet Package Manager](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/116698/installation/install-devexpress-controls-using-nuget-packages/setup-visual-studios-nuget-package-manager).
```

## Table of Contents

[**Build and Test a Basic Web API Service App (Backend)**](#build-and-test-a-basic-web-api-service-app-backend)

- [Create a Web API project using the XAF Solution Wizard](#create-a-web-api-project-using-the-xaf-solution-wizard)
- [Declare a data model](#declare-a-data-model)
- [Set up a development database connection](#set-up-a-development-database-connection)
- [Generate initial data](#generate-initial-data)
- [Use Swagger UI to test the Web API service](#use-swagger-ui-to-test-the-web-api-service)

[**Build and test a basic .NET MAUI App (Frontend)**](#build-and-test-a-basic-net-maui-app-frontend)

- [Create a .NET MAUI project](#create-a-net-maui-project)

> - [Modify platform specific settings](#modify-the-platform-specific-settings)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Modify platform-specific settings](#modify-the-platform-specific-settings)
```

- [Define the application's data model](#define-the-applications-data-model)
- [Implement and test first views: "Login" and "Item List"](#implement-and-test-first-views-login-and-item-list)

[**Extend backend and frontend apps**](#extend-backend-and-frontend-apps)

- [Add an "Item Details" View](#add-an-item-details-view)
- [Add a "New Item" entry form](#add-a-new-item-entry-form)
- [Allow users to archive records](#allow-users-to-archive-records)
- [Add reporting functionality](#add-reporting-functionality)

## Build and Test a Basic Web API Service App (Backend)

### Create a Web API project using the XAF Solution Wizard

1. In Visual Studio, create a new project. Use the DevExpress XAF Template Gallery template. Enter project information and start the Wizard. On the first page, select only one tile: **Service (ASP.NET Core Web API)**.

  ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardWebAPI.png)

2. Choose Entity Framework as your ORM.

  ![](../../images/MAUI/SolutionWizardEFCore.png)

> 3. Choose **Standard Authentication** to generate the [JWT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token)  authentication scaffolding code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Choose **Standard Authentication** to generate the [JWT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) authentication scaffolding code.
```

      public override void OnCreated() {
         base.OnCreated();
         Author = ObjectSpace.FindObject<ApplicationUser>(CriteriaOperator.Parse("ID=CurrentUserId()"));
      }
   }
   ```

   In the above code sample, the `Post` class inherits [BaseObject](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/DevExpress.Persistent.BaseImpl.BaseObject) to simplify data model implementation. This tutorial makes use of the following `BaseObject` features:

   - The predefined `Guid`-type primary key field (`ID`)
   - The `OnCreated` lifecycle method
   - The `ObjectSpace` property that allows you to communicate with the underlying data layer 
   
   See the [BaseObjectSpace](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/DevExpress.ExpressApp.BaseObjectSpace) documentation topic for more information.

2. Modify the Entity Framework DBContext with an additional DbSet.

   _BusinessObjects\WebAPIDbContext.cs_:
   ```cs
   public DbSet<Post> Posts { get; set; }
   ```

3. Modify the `Startup.cs` file to register the `built-in CRUD endpoints` for the Post object.

   _Startup.cs_:
   ```cs
   services
	 .AddXafWebApi(Configuration, options => {

> 	 	// Make your business objects available in the Web API and generate the GET,  POST, PUT, and DELETE HTTP methods for it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	 	// Make your business objects available in the Web API and generate the GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE HTTP methods for it.
```

To use SQLite, add the [Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Sqlite](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Sqlite) **v6** NuGet package to your project's dependencies. After that, add the following code to the `ConfigureServices` method within `Startup.cs`:

_Startup.cs_:
```cs
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services) {
   // ...
   services.AddDbContextFactory<WebAPIEFCoreDbContext>((serviceProvider, options) => { 
      if (RuntimeInformation.IsOSPlatform(OSPlatform.Windows)) {
         string connectionString = Configuration.GetConnectionString("ConnectionString");
         options.UseSqlServer(connectionString);
      }
      else {
         string sqliteDBPath = Path.Join(Environment.GetFolderPath(Environment.SpecialFolder.LocalApplicationData), "WebAPIDemo.db");
         options.UseSqlite($"Data Source={sqliteDBPath}");
      }
      // ...
   }
}
```

### Generate initial data

> 1. Open the the `WebAPI/DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs` file and add the following code to the `UpdateDatabaseAfterUpdateSchema` method to create the Editor and Viewer users, assigns them roles and permissions, and create sample Post objects:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Open the `WebAPI/DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs` file and add the following code to the `UpdateDatabaseAfterUpdateSchema` method to create the Editor and Viewer users, assign roles and permissions to them, and create sample Post objects:
```

         post = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<Post>();
         post.Title = "Hello MAUI";
         post.Content = "Please smash the like button to help our videos get  discovered";
         post.Author=editorUser;
     }
   ```

### Use Swagger UI to test the Web API service

At this point, you can already run your Web API service and use the Swagger interface to authenticate as one of the previously defined users and test the generated endpoints (for example, query the available posts). See the following article for additional information: [Test the Web API with Swagger or Postman](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404281/backend-web-api-service/test-the-web-api-with-swagger-postman).

![](../../images/MAUI/SwaggerQueryPosts.png)

![](../../images/MAUI/SwaggerPostsResponse.png)

## Build and test a basic .NET MAUI app (Frontend)

### Create a .NET MAUI project

> **NOTE** 
>
> Debugging configurations for both iOS and Android can be complex, so it is not feasible to provide all possible scenarios. We tested the app on Windows 10 with Visual Studio 2022. For iOS tests, we paired a remote Mac. For Android tests, we utilized the built-in emulator.

> 1. Open the the _Create a new project_ window in Visual Studio. Select the DevExpress .NET MAUI option and start the wizard. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Open the _Create a new project_ window in Visual Studio. Select the DevExpress .NET MAUI option and start the wizard.
```

  ![](../../images/MAUI/MAUINewProjectWizard.png)

2. Choose both the _iOS & Android_ platforms, the _Tabbed_ layout, and the following controls: _Collection View_, _Data Editors_, and _Data Forms_.

  ![](../../images/MAUI/MAUINewProjectWizardConfig.png)

> ### Modify platform specific settings

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Modify platform-specific settings
```

> 1. In the `Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml` file, to set up the file provider, which is required for the application to store downloaded reports:

Reviewer 3: I'd like to add a phrase that introduces the code below if possible. Does the reader need to add the code below to the `Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml` file? For example, do you mean:

```1. In the `Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml` file, add the code below to set up the file provider, which is required for the application to store downloaded reports:```

Reviewer 2: I applied your version, thank you

Reviewer 3: Thank you

   _Platform/Android/AndroidManifest.xml_:
   ```xml
     <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
     <manifest xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android">
         <uses-sdk android:minSdkVersion="21" android:targetSdkVersion="33" />
         <application android:allowBackup="true" android:icon="@mipmap/appicon"  android:roundIcon="@mipmap/appicon_round" android:supportsRtl="true">
         <provider
         android:name="androidx.core.content.FileProvider"
         android:authorities="${applicationId}.provider"
         android:exported="false"
         android:grantUriPermissions="true">
         <meta-data
             android:name="android.support.FILE_PROVIDER_PATHS"
             android:resource="@xml/provider_paths" />
         </provider>
     </application>
     <!-- ... --> 
     </manifest>
   ```

> 3. Add an `AndroidMessageHandler` class definition to `Platform/Android/AndroidMessageHandler.cs`. You will use this class to create an HTTP Client object that exchanges messages with the backend. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add an `AndroidMessageHandler` class definition to `Platform/Android/AndroidMessageHandler.cs`. You will use this class to create an HTTP Client object that exchanges messages with the backend.
```

   namespace MAUI.Platforms.Android {
      class AndroidMessageHandler : Xamarin.Android.Net.AndroidMessageHandler {
            public AndroidMessageHandler() 
               => ServerCertificateCustomValidationCallback = (_, cert, _, errors) 
                  => cert is { Issuer: "CN=localhost" } || errors == System.Net. Security.SslPolicyErrors.None;

            protected override Javax.Net.Ssl.IHostnameVerifier GetSSLHostnameVerifier (Javax.Net.Ssl.HttpsURLConnection connection)
               => new HostnameVerifier();

            private sealed class HostnameVerifier : Java.Lang.Object, Javax.Net.Ssl. IHostnameVerifier {
               public bool Verify(string hostname, Javax.Net.Ssl.ISSLSession  session) 
                  => Javax.Net.Ssl.HttpsURLConnection.DefaultHostnameVerifier!. Verify(hostname, session) ||
                  hostname == "10.0.2.2" && session.PeerPrincipal?.Name ==  "CN=localhost";
            }
      }
   }

   namespace MAUI.Services {
      public static partial class HttpMessageHandler {
            static HttpMessageHandler() 
               => PlatformHttpMessageHandler = new AndroidMessageHandler();
      }
   } 
   ```

> 4. You need the same functionality for iOS applications too. Create an `IOSMessageHandler` class in the `Platform/IOS` folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. The same functionality for iOS applications is also required. Create an `IOSMessageHandler` class in the `Platform/IOS` folder.
```

             NSUrlSessionHandler nSUrlSessionHandler = new();
             nSUrlSessionHandler.ServerCertificateCustomValidationCallback += (_,  cert, _, errors) 
                 => cert is { Issuer: "CN=localhost" } || errors == System.Net. Security.SslPolicyErrors.None;
             nSUrlSessionHandler.TrustOverrideForUrl = (sender, url, trust) => {
                 return true;
             };
             PlatformHttpMessageHandler = nSUrlSessionHandler;
	     }
     }
   ```

### Define the application's data model
   
1. Add a definition for the `Post` class in the `Model/Post.cs` file.

   _Model/Post.cs_:
   ```cs
   public class Post {
       [JsonIgnore(Condition = JsonIgnoreCondition.WhenWritingDefault)]
       public Guid ID { get; set; }
       public string Title { get; set; }
       public string Content { get; set; }    
   }
   ```

2. Refactor the `IDataStore` interface in `Services/IDataStore.cs` so it declares a `GetItemsAsync` method used to obtain the list of existing posts.

   _Services/IDataStore.cs_:
   ```cs
   public interface IDataStore<T> {
      Task<IEnumerable<T>> GetItemsAsync(bool forceRefresh = false);
   }
   ```

> 2. Configure the `BaseViewModel` to use the data store:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Configure the `BaseViewModel` to use the data store:
```

   _ViewModels/BaseViewModel.cs_:
   ```cs
   public class BaseViewModel : INotifyPropertyChanged {
       public IDataStore<Post> DataStore => DependencyService.Get<IDataStore<Post>>();
       // ...
   }
   ```

> 3. Add a `WebAPIService` class to the project (the `Services/WebAPIService.cs` file). In this class, implement the `IDataStore` interface and the `Authenticate` method. In the code, send HTTP requests to your Web API service to authenticate and obtain data as shown below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Add a `WebAPIService` class to the project (the `Services/WebAPIService.cs` file). In this class, implement the `IDataStore` interface and the `Authenticate` method. In the code, send HTTP requests to your Web API service to authenticate and obtain data as shown below:
```

         var tokenResponse = await RequestTokenAsync(userName, password);
         var reposeContent = await tokenResponse.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
         if (tokenResponse.IsSuccessStatusCode) {
               HttpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Authorization = new AuthenticationHeaderValue("Bearer", reposeContent);
               return string.Empty;
         }
         return reposeContent;
      }

      private async Task<HttpResponseMessage> RequestTokenAsync(string userName, string password) {
         try {
               return await HttpClient.PostAsync($"{_apiUrl}Authentication/Authenticate",
                     new StringContent(JsonSerializer.Serialize(new { userName, password = $"{password}" }), Encoding.UTF8, ApplicationJson));
         }
         catch (Exception) {
               return new HttpResponseMessage(System.Net.HttpStatusCode.BadGateway) { Content = new StringContent("An error occurred during the processing of the request. Please consult the demo's ReadMe file (Step 1,10) to discover potential causes and find solutions.") };
         }
      }

   }
   ```

   > **NOTE** 
   >

>    > If you are developing on a Windows PC and using a remote Mac to do the build and run the simulator, localhost will not resolve to the machine where you host your Web API service. Multiple solution guides are available online. For example, you may find the following article helpful: [Accessing ASP. NET Core API hosted on Kestrel over Https from iOS Simulator](https://nicksnettravels.builttoroam.com/post-2019-04-28-accessing-aspnet-core-api-hosted-on-kestrel-from-ios-simulator-android-emulator-and-uwp-applications-aspx/). 

Reviewer 3: I think we should use the actual article title here:

```suggestion
   > If you are developing on a Windows PC and using a remote Mac to do the build and run the simulator, localhost will not resolve to the machine where you host your Web API service. Multiple solution guides are available online. For example, you may find the following article helpful: [Accessing ASP.NET Core API hosted on Kestrel over Https from iOS Simulator, Android Emulator and UWP Applications.](https://nicksnettravels.builttoroam.com/post-2019-04-28-accessing-aspnet-core-api-hosted-on-kestrel-from-ios-simulator-android-emulator-and-uwp-applications-aspx/)
```

   First, add the `Photo` property to the `ApplicationUser` persistent class:

   _BusinessObjects/ApplicationUser.cs_:
   ```cs
   public class ApplicationUser : PermissionPolicyUser, ISecurityUserWithLoginInfo {
      // ...
      public virtual MediaDataObject Photo { get; set; }
   }
   ```

   Modify the Module Updater. Add logic that assigns photos to predefined users:

   _DatabaseUpdate\Updater.cs_:
   ```cs
   // ...
   editorUser.Photo = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<MediaDataObject>();
   editorUser.Photo.MediaData = GetResourceByName("Janete");
   viewerUser.Photo = ObjectSpace.CreateObject<MediaDataObject>();
   viewerUser.Photo.MediaData = GetResourceByName("John");
   // ...
   ```

   > **NOTE**
   >
   > In the example code, the `GetResourceByName` method returns a byte array representation of an account image based on its name. You can find an example implementation of this method in the Web API project's [_DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs_](./WebApi/DatabaseUpdate/Updater.cs) file. Note that this implementation requires the image resources to be compiled into the application's assembly (the .jpg files' `Build Action` option must be set to `Embedded resource`).

>    Add a `CustomEndPointController` inside the `WebAPI/API` directory, inject the `ISecurityProvider` and `IObjectSpaceFactory`. Implement a controller action that serves post author photos as shown below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Add a `CustomEndPointController` inside the `WebAPI/API` directory, and inject the `ISecurityProvider` and `IObjectSpaceFactory`. Implement a controller action that serves post author photos as shown below.
```

      <Label Text="Content:" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="12" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalLightText}" />
      <Label Text="{Binding Content}" FontFamily="Roboto" FontSize="14" TextColor="{StaticResource NormalText}"/>
      <Label Text="Author:"></Label>
      <Image   Source="{Binding Thumbnail}"></Image>
   </StackLayout>
   ```

![](../../images/MAUI/DetailView.png)

### Add a "New Item" entry form

1. The Web API Service automatically generates OData endpoints required to create business objects. However, the example application's security system is configured to disallow post creation for some users. You want to check permissions before a user can try and submit a post. For this purpose, implement a custom `CanCreate` endpoint.

   _API/CustomEndPointController.cs_:
   ```cs
   [HttpGet(nameof(CanCreate))]
   public IActionResult CanCreate(string typeName) {
       var strategy = (SecurityStrategy)_securityProvider.GetSecurity();
       var objectType = strategy.TypesInfo.PersistentTypes.First(info => info.Name  == typeName).Type;
       return Ok(strategy.CanCreate(objectType));
   }
   ```

> 2. Add new methods to the .NET MAUI application's data service: one will check user permissions, another will  submit a new post.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add new methods to the .NET MAUI application's data service: one will check user permissions, another will submit a new post.
```

            if (!await DataStore.UserCanCreatePostAsync()) {
                await Shell.Current.DisplayAlert("Error", "Permission denied", "OK");
            }
            else {
                await DataStore.ArchivePostAsync(Post);
            }
        }

        public Command ArchiveCommand { get; }
    }
   ```

   _Views/ItemDetailPage.xaml_
   ```xml
   <ContentPage.ToolbarItems >
       <ToolbarItem Text="Archive" Command="{Binding ArchiveCommand}"></ToolbarItem>
   </ContentPage.ToolbarItems>
   ```

![](../../images/MAUI/Archive.png)

### Add reporting functionality

The [XAF Reports module](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113591/shape-export-print-data/reports/reports-v2-module-overview?p=netframework) is a [Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml) feature that you can use to easily integrate [DevExpress Reports](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/reporting/) into your backend Web API service. Skip this step if you are using the Web API service as a part of the _DevExpress .NET App Security Library_ & Web API service free offer.

Follow the steps below to create and initialize a report:

> 1. Add a DevExpress Report component using the Visual Studio's New Item wizard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Add a DevExpress Report component using the Visual Studio New Item wizard.
```
